“I must be myself, I cannot break myself
any longer for you. . .If you can love me
for what I am, we shall be the happier. If
you cannot, I will still seek to deserve that
you should.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-Reliance
The great 19th century American philosopher
Ralph Waldo Emerson believed that to flourish
we must be a non-conformist. If we just think
as others think and do as others do, we limit
our potential and place our health or sickness
at the mercy of social forces beyond our control.
In this video we are going to explore the
dangers of conformity, what non-conformity
meant for Emerson, and how the non-conformist
acts as a force of good in a society gone
mad.  
“Whoso would be a man must be a nonconformist.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-Reliance
To be a conformist is to orient our life around
the dominant norms, values, and ideals of
our society. It is to allow the boundaries
and templates of our culture to shape our
sense of self. Most of us become conformists
without reflecting on what we are doing – we
see everyone around us conforming and so it
feels natural to do the same. But conformity
comes at a price, or as Emerson stated in
a lecture given in 1844:
“I pay a destructive tax in my conformity.”  
 Ralph Waldo Emerson, Lecture Read Before
the Society in Amory Hall, March 1844
In any society only certain character traits
are favoured by the trends of conformity,
while many others – which may be healthy
in their own right – are looked upon with
indifference or disdain. In our day, for example,
extroversion is favoured over introversion,
obedience over disobedience, and risk-aversion
over risk-taking. Some people may find their
inner nature fits the mould of conformity,
but many will find the opposite. For those
of us in the latter group, conformity is akin
to wearing a mask made to fit the mould of
another’s face. The mask of conformity never
feels comfortable and at times it may cause
us to feel like a fraud or imposter. 
Conformity also leads to waste – wasted
time, wasted opportunities, and wasted resources.
In the need to satisfy others and maintain
appearances, we do things we do not value,
say things we do not believe, and obtain things
we do not need, or as Emerson writes:  
“Custom . . . gives me no power therefrom,
and runs me in debt to boot. We spend our
incomes . . . for a hundred trifles, I know
not what, and not for the things of a man.
Our expense is almost all for conformity.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Man the Reformer
But the dangers of conformity reach pathological
levels when, as in our day, a society becomes
infected with lies. Politicians lie almost
as frequently as they open their mouths. A
degenerate education system teaches lies on
topics ranging from science, to history, ethics,
economics, and politics. The media lies about
world events. While corporations lie to us
about the value, or safety, of their products.
With no shortage of lies percolating throughout
society, the modern path of conformity leads
in errant ways. It encourages us to go into
debt to buy things we don’t need, to consume
unhealthy foods, to be obedient to those in
power, to take pharmaceutical drugs that do
more harm than good, to eschew our passion
in favour of money or social status, and if
we ever feel anxious or depressed, the conformist
way is to distract ourselves with screens,
or to numb ourselves with psychotropic drugs.  
“All goes well as long as you run with conformists.
But you, who are an honest man in other particulars,
know that there is alive somewhere a man whose
honesty reaches to this point also, that he
shall not kneel to false gods, and, on the
day when you meet him, you sink into the class
of counterfeits. . . If you take in a lie,
you must take in all that belongs to it.”
 
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Religion
To be a non-conformist, in the modern world,
is to renounce the lies that shape our society
and to renounce the self that has been shaped
by these lies. This act of renunciation paves
the way for self-transformation, or as Emerson
writes: “The man who renounces himself,
comes to himself.” (Ralph Waldo Emerson,
Lecture to Divinity Students). When we abandon
the habits of conformity and stop pursing
its ideals, we clear the way for the emergence
of a more authentic state of being. We take
off the false mask of conformity and permit
our individual personality to shine through.
But our renunciation should not be limited
to self-renunciation, we should also renounce
affiliation with organizations and institutions
that are infiltrated by the lies of our society.
For a non-conformist, according to Emerson,
must stand under his or her own banner, not
the banner of another:  
“It is only as a man puts off all foreign
support, and stands alone, that I see him
to be strong and to prevail. He is weaker
by every recruit to his banner.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-Reliance
Along with the act of renunciation, the non-conformist
must establish a new direction in life as
merely rejecting conformist ways, without
replacing them with something new, will leave
us in a pit of aimless and meaningless despair.
We need new pursuits to keep us occupied,
new habits to keep our life structured, and
new goals to give us direction. In the process
of re-orienting our life, we should work with
what nature has granted us, as it is by cultivating
our strengths and talents and aligning our
life around pursuits we enjoy, that we unleash
our power and pave the way for a great life,
or as Emerson writes: 
“There is a time in every man’s education
when he arrives at the conviction . . that
though the wide universe is full of good,
no kernel of nourishing corn can come to him
but through his toil bestowed on that plot
of ground which is given to him to till. The
power which resides in him is new in nature,
and none but he knows what that is which he
can do, nor does he know until he has tried.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-Reliance
If conformity has led us astray and we don’t
know where truth lies or what the plot of
ground we are meant to till consists of, spending
time in solitude can help correct for this
confusion. Away from the chatter and distraction
of other minds, solitude can help us understand
who we are and what we want from life. There
are voices, wrote Emerson “which we hear
in solitude, [that] grow faint and inaudible
as we enter into the world.” (Ralph Waldo
Emerson, Self-Reliance).  Emerson, however,
while valuing solitude, did not believe the
non-conformist should be a recluse. To flourish
as a non-conformist is to strike the optimal
balance between solitude and society. We must
learn to live in harmony with others without
an excessive need to gain their approval or
to mimic their errant ways. Or as Emerson
put it: 
“Solitude is impracticable, and society
fatal. We must keep our head in the one and
our hands in the other. The conditions are
met, if we keep our independence, yet do not
lose our sympathy.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Society and Solitude
Many people recognize the sickness of modern
society, but few choose a path of non-conformity
as the means of escape. One reason for this
is fear, and specifically a fear of ridicule
and rejection. The non-conformist must overcome
this fear, or at least learn that constructive,
non-conformist action can be taken even when
consumed by fear: 
“What I must do is all that concerns me,
not what the people think. This rule. . .may
serve for the whole distinction between greatness
and meanness. . .It is easy in the world to
live after the world’s opinion; it is easy
in solitude to live after our own; but the
great man is he who in the midst of the crowd
keeps with perfect sweetness the independence
of solitude.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Self-Reliance
In learning to deal with ridicule and rejection
it can be helpful to recognize a constructive
value to this experience. Not only does it
provide us with an opportunity to cultivate
the courage of acting in the face of our fears,
but furthermore, those who treat us with contempt
sometimes reveal truths of our character that
those who care for us are too timid to point
out. But even if the ridicule is not constructive,
even if it is based on envy or lies, we can
use the disapproval of others as motivating
fuel that impels us to greater heights, and
as Emerson writes: 
“Dear to us are those who love us; the swift
moments we spend with them are a compensation
for a great deal of misery; they enlarge our
life; but dearer are those who reject us as
unworthy, for they add another life: they
build a heaven before us whereof we had not
dreamed, and thereby supply to us new powers
out of the recesses of the spirit, and urge
us to new and unattempted performances.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson, New England Reformers
If we learn to conquer the fear of ridicule
and rejection, we will possess a crucial skill
in the art of non-conformity. But there is
another barrier that prevents many from going
the way of a non-conformist and this is laziness.
To cultivate our own path through life requires
hard work, discipline, and a ruthless persistence
of action. For Emerson’s non-conformist
is not passive, he is an active agent striving
to change the world. Once the non-conformist
selects a valuable goal, he sticks to it and
is not driven off course merely because a
bunch conformists disapprove of his ways,
or as Emerson writes: 
“All men have wandering impulses, fits and
starts of generosity. But when you have chosen
your part, abide by it, and do not weakly
try to reconcile yourself with the world.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Heroism
Or as he writes elsewhere: 
“If you would serve your brother, because
it is fit for you to serve him, do not take
back your words when you find that prudent
people do not commend you. Adhere to your
own act, and congratulate yourself if you
have done something strange and extravagant
and broken the monotony of a decorous age.
It was a high counsel that I once heard given
to a young person – “Always do what you
are afraid to do.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Heroism
Following a non-conformist path will make
us healthier, happier, and more powerful,
but it will also turn us into a force of good
in the world. For the inner state of our being
manifests the events of the outer world, or
as Emerson put it: “A man will see his
character emitted in the events that seem
to meet [him], but which exude from and accompany
him.” (Ralph Waldo Emerson, The Conduct
of Life) Conformists, in living by lies,
are manifesting a sick society. The non-conformist,
in aligning himself with the truth of his
inner nature and the truth of the world, will
manifest events that act as the antidote to
a world gone mad.  
“In the thought of tomorrow there is a power
to upheave . . .all the creeds. . .of the
nations, and marshal thee to a heaven which
no epic dream has yet depicted. Every man
is not so much a workman in the world, as
he is a suggestion of that he should be. Men
walk as prophecies of the next age.”
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Circles